Taking Robota Psyche during my senior year, as an IM major, has definitely added a different dimension to my spring semester. Looking back, creating digital ecosystem using p5.js gave me an insight on how our realities can be replicated through code to a certain extent, but not in its entirety. The complexity of our natural ecosystems, emergent from its individual constituents and the physical, mental, and emotional interactions within them is one that is not yet, or perhaps could never be, replicated by purely logical systems alone, presented by code. This encouraged me to adapt a similar lens when viewing robots, one that gives attention to its inner complexities, too often neglected and shadowed under the mechanical exterior. The discussion helped me untangle the robot identity from this new lens. In particular, it was interesting noticing how the questions untangling the nature of the robot identity always prompted discussions regarding our very own identity, as humans, requiring an understanding and insight into the complex dimensions that are inherent to the internal and external workings of the human species. 

The weekly individual presentations helped me broaden my knowledge about the current state of robotics, in various fields of psychology, philosophy, biology, anthropology, ethics, and the power it holds, not always entirely visible,  in reshaping our humanity one interaction at a time. It also provoked thoughts regarding the effects of integrating such species into our daily lives, both beneficial and potentially harmful. Seeing the current changes in our ways of living brought upon by the technologies we interact on a daily basis - from social media, our computers, our phones, etc - made me recognize both the incredible adaptive nature of our species but also the vulnerability that comes it. Such realization made me further realize the importance of collectively enquiring and envisioning about *the direction* that we take with these technologies.  Constructing the most “ideal” direction to take required discussions with one another about what the ideal is and reflecting on our collective lived experiences. A process which requires asking ourselves, what aspects of human nature are we okay with leaving behind, and what aspects do we want change seen in? In short, how much of our human nature are we willing to compromise? This level of compromise determines how much we let the robots resemble us. Are we only comfortable with species that are similar to us, and predictable as a result? Or are we ready to encompass a species, entirely different from us in nature, and the consequences that rise from it? As the main stakeholders, responsible for the direction of development in this field, these are some of the endless questions we must ask each other prior to being blind sighted by the alluring nature of the “new”, packaged and sold in the form of innovation and convenience.
